.TH YAESM 1 "2026-03-25" "yaesm 0.0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
yaesm \- a backup tool with support for multiple file systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yaesm
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I SUBCOMMAND
.RI [ SUBCOMMAND-OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B yaesm
is a backup tool that supports multiple file system backends (btrfs, rsync)
and multiple backup timeframes (5-minute, hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, yearly).
Backups can be performed locally or over SSH.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the program version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Path to the configuration file.
Default:
.IR /etc/yaesm/config.yaml .
.TP
.B \-\-log\-level \fILEVEL\fR
Set the logging level.
.I LEVEL
is one of
.BR DEBUG ", " INFO ", " WARNING ", " ERROR ", " CRITICAL .
Default:
.BR INFO .
.TP
.B \-\-log\-stderr
Log to standard error.
.TP
.B \-\-log\-file \fIFILE\fR
Log to
.IR FILE .
.TP
.B \-\-log\-syslog \fR[\fIADDRESS\fR]
Enable syslog logging and optionally specify a syslog address.
Default address:
.IR /dev/log .
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B run
Start the backup scheduler.
The scheduler blocks indefinitely and is intended for use by init systems.
See
.BR yaesm\-run (1).
.TP
.B check
Validate that all preconditions for a backup are met.
See
.BR yaesm\-check (1).
.TP
.B backup
Perform a single manual backup.
See
.BR yaesm\-backup (1).
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B yaesm
reads its configuration from a YAML file (default:
.IR /etc/yaesm/config.yaml ).
Each top-level key defines a named backup.
.SS Required fields
.TP
.B backend
The backup backend to use.
One of
.BR btrfs " or " rsync .
.TP
.B src_dir
Source directory.
An absolute local path or an SSH target spec
(see
.B SSH TARGET SPECS
below).
.TP
.B dst_dir
Destination directory.
An absolute local path or an SSH target spec.
At most one of
.B src_dir
and
.B dst_dir
may be an SSH target.
.TP
.B timeframes
A list of timeframe types to schedule.
Valid types:
.BR 5minute ", " hourly ", " daily ", " weekly ", " monthly ", " yearly .
Each type requires additional settings (see
.B TIMEFRAME SETTINGS
below).
.SS Optional fields
.TP
.B ssh_key
Path to the SSH private key.
Required when either
.B src_dir
or
.B dst_dir
is an SSH target.
.TP
.B ssh_config
Path to an SSH configuration file, passed to ssh via the
.B \-F
flag.
.TP
.B btrfs_bootstrap_refresh
For the btrfs backend only.
Number of days before the bootstrap snapshot is refreshed.
Must be a positive integer.
.SS Example
.RS
.nf
my-home-backup:
  backend: btrfs
  src_dir: /home
  dst_dir: /mnt/backups/home
  timeframes:
    - hourly
    - daily
  hourly_keep: 24
  hourly_minutes:
    - 0
  daily_keep: 30
  daily_times:
    - 00:00
.fi
.RE
.SH TIMEFRAME SETTINGS
Each timeframe type listed in
.B timeframes
requires associated settings.
.TP
.B 5minute
Requires
.BR 5minute_keep .
.TP
.B hourly
Requires
.BR hourly_keep " and " hourly_minutes .
.B hourly_minutes
is a list of minutes (0\-59) at which to run within each hour.
.TP
.B daily
Requires
.BR daily_keep " and " daily_times .
.B daily_times
is a list of times in
.B HH:MM
format.
.TP
.B weekly
Requires
.BR weekly_keep ", " weekly_times ", and " weekly_days .
.B weekly_days
is a list of day names (e.g.,
.BR monday ", " friday ).
.TP
.B monthly
Requires
.BR monthly_keep ", " monthly_times ", and " monthly_days .
.B monthly_days
is a list of day numbers (1\-31).
Months without a given day are skipped.
.TP
.B yearly
Requires
.BR yearly_keep ", " yearly_times ", and " yearly_days .
.B yearly_days
is a list of day-of-year numbers (1\-365).
.PP
All
.B *_keep
values specify the maximum number of backups to retain for that timeframe.
.SH SSH TARGET SPECS
An SSH target spec has the form:
.PP
.RS
.B ssh://\fR[\fBp\fIPORT\fB:\fR]\fIHOST\fB:\fIPATH\fR
.RE
.PP
where
.I HOST
is either a hostname from
.B ~/.ssh/config
or
.IR USER @ HOSTNAME ,
and
.I PATH
is an absolute path on the remote server.
The
.BI p PORT :
prefix is optional and defaults to port 22.
.SS Examples
.RS
.nf
ssh://p2222:fred@backupserver:/mnt/backups
ssh://backuphost:/mnt/backups
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General error.
.TP
.B 2
Subcommand-specific error (e.g., unknown backup name).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/yaesm/config.yaml
Default configuration file.
.TP
.I /run/lock/yaesm\-run.lock
Lock file used by the
.B run
subcommand to prevent multiple scheduler instances.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/Vultimate1/yaesm/issues
.UE .
